Now that we've covered many
of the mechanics of pandas,
I want to stop and talk for
a moment about data
types and scales.
We've already seen that
pandas supports a number of
different computational
data types such as strings,
integers, floating point numbers.
What this doesn't capture is what
we call the scale of the data.
Let's say that we have got
a DataFrame of students and
their academic levels such
as being in grade one,
grade two, and grade three.
Is the difference
between a student in
grade one and a student in grade
two the same as
the difference between
a student in grade eight
and one grade nine?
Or maybe let's think about
final exam scores these students
might get on assignments.
Is the difference between
an A and an A- the
same as the difference between
an A minus and a B plus?
So the University
of Michigan, at least,
the answer is often no,
at least not when
you're converting
this to a percentage-based scale.
We've intuitively seen
some different scales.
As we move through
data cleaning and into
statistical analysis
and machine learning,
it's important to clarify
our knowledge and terminology.
As a data scientist,
there's at least four
different scales
that's worth knowing about,
and I want to talk
about those now.
The first is the ratio scale.
In the ratio scale, the
measurement units are equally
spaced and mathematical
operations such as subtraction,
division, and multiplication
are all valid.
Good examples of the ratio scale
might be height and weight.
The next scale is
the interval scale.
In the interval scale,
the measurement units
are equally spaced,
like the ratio scale,
but there's no clear
absence of value.
That is, there isn't a true zero,
and so operations such as
multiplication and
division are not valid.
An example of the interval scale
might be the temperature
as measured in
Celsius or Fahrenheit
since there's
never an absence of temperature,
and zero degrees is actually
a meaningful value itself.
The direction on a compass
might be another good example,
where zero degrees on the compass
doesn't indicate
a lack of direction,
but instead describes
a direction itself.
For most of the work that
you'll be doing with data mining,
the differences between the ratio
and interval scales might not be
clearly apparent or important
to the algorithm that
you'll apply,
but it's important to have
this distinction clear in
your mind when applying
advanced statistical tests.
The next scale to understand
is the ordinal scale.
In the ordinal scale,
the order of values is important,
but the differences between
the values are not
equally spaced.
Here the grading method
that is used in
many classes at
the University of Michigan
is a great example,
where letter grades are given
with pluses and minuses,
but when you compare this
to a percentage value,
you see that a letter
by itself covers
four percent of
the available grades,
and then a letter with
a plus or minus is
usually just three percent
of the available grades.
Based on this, it would be odd if
there were as many
students who received
an A plus or an A minus
as there was who
received a straight A,
assuming, of course,
that we expect
each percentage point
in a course to
be uniformly likely to occur.
Ordinal data is very common in
machine learning
and sometimes can
be a bit of a challenge
to work with.
The last scale I'll mention
is the nominal scale,
which is often just
called categorical data.
Here the names of teams in
a sport might be a good example.
There are a limited
number of teams,
but changing their
order or applying
mathematical functions
to them is meaningless.
Categorical values are very
common and we generally refer to
categories where there are
only two possible values
as binary categories.
So why did I stop talking about
pandas and jump into
this discussion of scale?
Well, given how
important they are
in statistics and
machine learning,
pandas has a number of
interesting functions to
deal with converting
between measurement scales.
Let's start first
with nominal data,
which in pandas is
called categorical data.
Pandas actually has a built-in
type for categorical data,
and you could set
a column of your data to
categorical simply by
using the astype method.
Astype tries to change the
underlying type of your data,
in this case, to category data,
and you can further
change this to
ordinal data by passing in
an ordered flag set to true and
passing in the categories
in an ordered fashion.
So let's take a look at
an example of this in pandas.
So let's bring in
pandas as normal.
So we'll just import
pandas as pd.
So here's an example,
let's create a DataFrame of
letter grades in
descending order.
We can also set an index value,
and here we'll just
make it some human
judgment of how
good a student was.
So I just made these up,
like excellent or good.
So we just create
our new DataFrame and
parse in all of
our different letter grades,
and then we set our index as
normal to align with
those letter grades,
and then to just say what
we want it to be called.
Let's take a look
at that. Now, if
we check the data type
of this column,
we'll see that it's
just an object
since we set string values.
So if we do df.dtypes,
we see that it's an object.
We can, however, tell pandas
that we want to change
the type to category using
the astype function.
So the way we do this is we just
put category in quotes to astype.
It's a special string.
So we'll do
df["Grades"].astype("category").
Let's take a look at
the head of that.
Now, we see that
there's 11 categories,
and pandas is aware of
what those categories are.
More interesting though
is that our data
isn't just categorical
in this case,
but it's actually ordered.
That is, an A minus
comes after a B plus,
and a B comes before a B pus.
We can tell pandas that the data
is ordered by first creating
a new categorical data type with
the list of categories in order,
and the ordered equals true flag.
So I'll create a new
variable, my_categories,
and then we're going to use
pd.CategoricalDtype So this
is going to create
a new data type
object and then category.
So I'm going to pass in
the list of categories,
and then I'm going to say
that it's ordered as true.
So now we can just pass this to
the astype function
instead of that string.
So grades=df["Grades"].astype,
and now we're just
going to pass in
our new categorical dtype.
Let's take a look at
the head of grades.
So now we see that
pandas is not only
aware that there
are 11 categories,
but it's also aware of the
order of those categories.
So what can you do with this?
Well, because
there's an ordering,
this can help with some
comparisons and Boolean masking.
For instance, if
we have a list of
our grades and we
compare them to a C,
we can see that
lexicographical comparisons,
which is the default for strings,
return results that
we're not intending.
So let's take our DataFrame
and df subgrades.
Remember, this is the one
that isn't categorical data,
these are just objects.
We want a Boolean mask where
the grades are greater than
a C. So a C plus
is greater than a C but
a C minus and a D
are certainly not.
However, if we broadcast
over the DataFrame which
has the type set to
ordered categorical,
we get the results
we might expect.
Here are the grades
DataFrame which is set with
the correct categorical type
and grades greater than
C. We see that
the operator works as
we would expect here.
We can then use a certain set
of mathematical operators,
like minimum, maximum, etc,
on this ordinal data.
Sometimes it's useful to
represent categorical
values as each
being a column with a true or
false as to whether
the category applies.
This is especially common
in feature extraction,
which is a topic in
the data mining course.
Variables with a Boolean value
are typically called
dummy variables,
and pandas has built-in
function called get dummies,
which will convert the values
of a single column
into multiple columns
of zeros and ones,
indicating the presence
of a dummy variable.
I rarely use it, but when
I do, it's very handy.
There's one more common
scale-based operation
that I'd like to talk about,
and that's on
converting a scale from
something that is on
the interval or ratio scale,
like a numeric grade,
into one which is categorical.
Now, this might seem a bit
counter intuitive to
you since you're losing
information about the value,
but it's commonly done
in a couple of places.
For instance, if
you're visualizing
the frequencies of categories,
this can be an extremely
useful approach,
and histograms are regularly used
with converted interval
or ratio data.
In addition, if you're
using a machine learning
classification approach on data,
you'll need to be using
categorical data.
So reducing dimensionality may be
useful just to apply
a given technique.
Pandas has a function called
cut which takes an argument,
some array-like structure like
a column of a DataFrame
or a series.
It also takes a number
of bins to be used
and all bins are kept
at equal spacing.
So let's go back to
some census data as an example.
We saw that we could group by
state and then aggregate to
get a list of the average
county size by state.
If we further apply cut to
this with, say, 10 bins,
we could see that
the states listed as
categoricals using
the average county size.
So let's bring in NumPy.
So import numpy as np.
Now, we'll read in our data set.
So this is in dataset/census.csv,
and we'll reduce this
to county-level data.
We just want to take
the sum level equals
50 and for a few groups.
So we'll set the index
to state name,
we'll groupby level equals 0,
and we'll look at just this
census 2010 population.
Let's look at
the average values there.
Let's look at the head of this.
Now, if we just want to
make bins of each of these,
we can use cut.
So you can say pd.cut we
parse in the DataFrame
that we've created,
and let's say we want 10 bins.
So here we see that
states like Alabama and
Alaska fall into
the same category,
while California and
the District of Columbia
fall into very
different categories.
Now, cutting is just one way
to build categoricals
from your data,
and there's many other methods.
For instance, cut gives
you interval data,
where the spacing between
each category is equally sized,
but sometimes you want to form
categories based on frequency.
You want the number of
items in each bin to be the
same and instead of
spacing between the bins.
So it really depends
on what your data is,
and what you're
planning to do with it.